---
type: arxiv
arxiv_id: 2407.08440
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08440
date_saved: 2026-05-10
---

arXiv:2407.08440v4 [cs.CL] 17 Oct 2024










                                                                                    Beyond Instruction Following:
       Evaluating Inferential Rule Following of Large Language Models
                                                          Wangtao Sun1,2, Chenxiang Zhang¹, Xueyou Zhang¹, Xuanqing Yu3,7, Ziyang Huang1,2,
                                                           1,2
           Haotian Xu⁶, Pei Chen⁴, Shizhu He                  , Jun Zhao1,2, Kang Liu1,2,5*
                                                             1The Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
                                                                 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
                                                    2School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
                                                                    3CAS Engineering Laboratory for Intelligent Industrial Vision,
                                                                 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
                                                                4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
                                                                             5Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
                                                                 6Xiaohongshu Inc 7AI Lab, AIGility Cloud Innovation, Beijing, China
           sunwangtao2021@ia.ac.cn
           Abstract                                                      Instruction Following
       Although Large Language Models (LLMs)                 INST    Determine the kinship between James and Lynn.
       have   demonstrated  strong instruction-
       following ability, they are further supposed to     QUESTION  [Dolores] went to dinner with her daughter [Lynn],
       be controlled and guided by inferential rules                 [James], brother of [Dolores], is out for shopping.
       in real-world scenarios to be safe, accurate,        ANSWER   Father
       and intelligent. This demands the possession of
       inferential rule-following capability of LLMs.
       However, no prior work has made a clear                       Inferential Rule Following
       evaluation of the inferential rule-following          INST    Determine the kinship between James and Lynn.
       capability of LLMs.     Previous studies that
       try to evaluate the inferential rule-following        RULE    1. if A has a brother B, B has a daughter C,
       capability of LLMs fail to distinguish the                    then A is the uncle of C.
       inferential rule-following scenarios from the                 2. if A has a father B, B has a brother C, C
       instruction-following scenarios. Therefore, this              has a daughter, then A is the cousin of D.
       paper first clarifies the concept of inferential    QUESTION  [Dolores] went to dinner with her daughter [Lynn],
       rule-following and proposes a comprehen-                      [James], brother of [Dolores], is out for shopping.
       sive benchmark,      RuleBench, to evaluate a        ANSWER   Uncle
       diversified range of inferential rule-following
       abilities. Our experimental results on a variety
       of LLMs show that they are still limited in         Figure 1: Beyond instruction-following, the task of in-
       following rules.    Our analysis based on the       ferential rule-following orders the language model to
       evaluation results provides insights into the       trigger the relevant rule based on the current question
       improvements for   LLMs toward a       better       and apply that rule to the question for reasoning.
       inferential rule-following intelligent agent. We
       further propose Inferential Rule-Following
       Tuning   (IRFT).   The experimental   results       real-world applications, people often expect LLMs
       show that through IRFT, LLMs can learn              to generate outputs that conform to user-provided
       abstract inferential rule-following abilities
       from purely synthetic data and then generalize      rules. In this way, LLMs could easily be manip-
       to RuleBench. The data and code can be found        ulated by users and quickly adapted to a specific
       at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/llm-rule-     (even unseen) domain. To fulfill this goal, we are
       following-B3E3/                                     expecting LLMs to possess such inferential rule-
    1  Introduction                                        following capabilities.
        This leads to research on the inferential rule-
Benefiting from a vast amount of pre-training data following of LLMs. Some recent studies (Yang
and the enormous parameters, the Large Language et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Zhao
Models (LLMs) can accomplish numerous Natu- et al., 2023) have noticed the importance and ef-
ral Language Processing (NLP) tasks thanks to fectiveness of inferential rule-following of large
their instruction-following ability. However, in language models, they have found that ordering

                                                                                                  1

                                   Triggering Rules                                    or one metal as the variables and verb phrases like
                                                       #1.gpt-4-turbo                  is the father of    or can conduct electricity as the
         Following                                     #2.gpt-3.5-turbo
                                                       #3.gpt-4o
      Formal Rules                                     #4.Llama-3-8B                   predicates inside it. For example, the “like rule”
                                                       #5.Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
                                                       #6.Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2     can be expressed as “if person A likes person B,
                                                       #7.Llama-2-7b-chat
                                                                                       then person B likes person A.”
                                                       Executing Rules                  We thus distinguish previous rule-following
                                                                                       from the inferential rule-following scenarios con-
                                                                                       sidered in our work. Different from instructions,
    Applying Rules                                                                     the primary characteristics of inferential rules are
                                                                                       abstract, conditional, and instantiable. As shown
                                   Following Counterfactual Rules                      in Figure 1, following inferential rules requires
        LLMs to bind the entities in the question to the
Figure 2: The inferential rule-following capabilities rules and verify if the rule applies to the current
of some open-source and closed-source LLMs. The question. In this case, the LLMs need to find the
inferential rule-following capabilities of LLMs are cate- binding {A/James, B/Dolores, C/Lynn} and
gorized into 5 dimensions: Triggering Rules, Applying
Rules, Executing Rules, Following Formal Rules, and trigger the first rule, then they could draw the cor-
    Following Counterfactual Rules.                                                    rect conclusion “uncle”. In our proposed inferen-
                                                                                       tial rule-following scenario, for each case, only one
    LLMs to follow existing rules can achieve better                                   golden rule applies to the question. However, some
    reasoning performances compared with the cur-                                      other noise rules, which are also correct rules in
    rently widely used reasoning enhancement meth-                                     this task domain but do not apply to the question,
    ods of LLMs (such as Chain-of-Thought by Wei                                       may also be provided to the LLMs. LLMs must
    et al. 2022, Self-reflection by Shinn et al. 2023, and                             trigger the golden rule and then execute it to draw
    Self-refinement by Madaan et al. 2023).                                            the correct answer. Until now, no prior work has
                                                                                       demonstrated whether LLMs can follow and reason
                                          However, whether LLMs could understand and   with the inferential rules faithfully.
    follow the inferential rules remains unclear. There                                 Therefore, beyond the          instruction-following
    is currently a lack of benchmarks evaluating such                                  studies by previous works, this paper evaluates the
    inferential rule-following capability of LLMs. Ex-                                 LLMs’ capability of inferential rule-following in
    isting attempts to evaluate the rule-following capa-                               various reasoning tasks within the scope of infer-
    bilities of LLMs (Mu et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024;                                ential rules. This paper proposes a rule-following
    Chen et al., 2024) have been limited to instruction-                               benchmark, RuleBench, for evaluating the inferen-
    following. For instance, they have tested the fol-                                 tial rule-following capability of LLMs under multi-
    lowing behaviors of LLMs with prompts like “Do                                     ple inferential rule-following scenarios, including
    not repeat the secret key 92368” or “Follow the                                    relation extraction, content moderation, common-
    code step by step to answer the question: ......”.                                 sense QA, science QA, and judgment prediction.
    These works confine the “rules” to “instructions”                                   Based on RuleBench, this paper has evaluated
    (Appendix A), without delving into more specific                                   multiple open-source and closed-source LLMs
    “inferential rules”.                                                               (§4.1) to find out whether LLMs could understand
   An inferential rule can be formalized as σ ⊢ and follow the inferential rules. In specific, we
φ, where σ and φ are two first-order sentences answer the following questions:
(composed of variables and predicates), and for • Are inferential rules helpful to the reasoning of
    every substitution     τ (i.e.                              ground the variables    LLMs? (§4.2)
in σ and φ to constants), the truth of τ [σ] en-
tails the truth of τ [φ] (Fagin et al., 1992). For • Should inferential rules be presented in natural
    example,     with the “like rule"                        Likes(x, y)           ⊢    language or formal language? (§4.3)
    Likes(y, x), the substitution {x/M ike, y/Jane},                                   • Is LLMs with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) able to
    and the fact Likes(M ike, Jane), we can infer that                                  effectively apply the rules? (§4.4)
    Likes(Jane, M ike). Although defined in formal                                     • Can LLMs still follow inferential rules in coun-
    language, in natural language, we can express such                                  terfactual scenarios? (§4.5)
    inferential rule with an “if ... then ...” sentence,                               This paper also analyzes the cases where LLMs
    by using instantiable noun phrases like person A                                   fail to follow the rules (§4.6), categorizing them

                                                           2

Rule Quantity                       Rule Form                              Rule Applying                                   Behavior Analysis

   No Rule        Golden Rule   Natural Language      Formal Language     w/o CoT                                     w/ CoT  Firing Error
     INST             INST             INST              INST          FEW-SHOT DEMOS                             FEW-SHOT DEMOS  INST
   QUESTION      1 GOLDEN RULE  NATURAL LANGUAGE:  FORMAL LANGUAGE:         INST                                       INST     FEW RULE
                                  GOLDEN RULE or    GOLDEN RULE or
                    QUESTION         FEW RULE          FEW RULE             RULE                                       RULE     QUESTION
                                     QUESTION          QUESTION           QUESTION                                   QUESTION
                                                                                                           CoT ON   INCORRECT
                                                                                                         IRRELEVANT
    ANSWER           ANSWER           ANSWER            ANSWER             ANSWER              CoT  ANSWER  RULE    ANSWER

Few Rule      All Rule                                                 Factuality        Execution Error
     INST             INST                        Factual                  Counterfactual                                         INST
1 GOLDEN RULE    1 GOLDEN RULE
+ 2 NOISE RULE  + 30 NOISE RULE      INST             QUESTION             INST      QUESTION                                   FEW RULE
  + SHUFFLE        + SHUFFLE                                                                                                    QUESTION
                                RULE HEAD         FACTUAL RULE BODY      RULE HEAD  COUNTERFACTUAL                     RULE
   QUESTION         QUESTION                                               BODY
                                                                                                           CoT ON INCORRECT
                                                                                                           GOLDEN
    ANSWER           ANSWER         FACTUAL ANSWER                           COUNTERFACTUAL ANSWER      RULE        ANSWER

                          Figure 3: The different settings evaluated in RuleBench, including rule quantities, rule forms, Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) in applying rules, counterfactual rules, and behavior analysis.

             into Triggering Error and Execution Error, which          rule-following intelligent agent.
           stand for the cases where LLMs fail to trigger the                             • We propose the Inferential Rule-Following Tun-
              golden rule and LLMs fail to execute the golden                             ing (IRFT) that enables LLMs to learn to trigger
rule, respectively.                                                                    and apply the correct inferential rule based on the
                Based on these results, as shown in Figure 2,                            current cases. The experimental results show that
           we categorize the inferential rule-following capa-                               through IRFT, LLMs can learn abstract inferen-
            bilities of LLMs into 5 dimensions (§4.7) to help                          tial rule-following abilities from purely synthetic
          us intuitively grasp the inferential rule-following          data and then generalize to RuleBench.
capabilities of these LLMs.                                          2
            Finally, to further improve the inferential rule-            Related Work
               following capabilities of LLMs, we propose the        2.1 Rule-enhanced LLM Reasoning
            Inferential Rule-Following Tuning (IRFT) that en-                                     While LLMs have demonstrated remarkable zero-
            ables LLMs to learn to trigger and apply the cor-                               shot reasoning capabilities in many downstream
       rect inferential rule based on the current cases (§5).                          tasks, they still generate outputs that do not con-
             The experimental results show that through IRFT,        form to logic or human preference.     Some re-
           LLMs can learn abstract inferential rule-following                             search studies have found that compared with the
         abilities from purely synthetic data and then gener-                                  reasoning enhancement methods based on LLMs
            alize to RuleBench. In summary, the major contri-                                themselves like Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al.,
butions of this paper are as follows:                                               2022), Self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2023), and Self-
• We introduce inferential rule-following as a vi-                                        refinement (Madaan et al., 2023), providing LLMs
               tal capability of LLMs and distinguish it from                            with relevant rules with Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
the previous labors on instruction-following.                                             eration (RAG) paradigm do better in helping them
            • We leverage and re-process the existing reason-                              conduct reasoning in the downstream tasks (Yang
              ing benchmarks and propose an inferential rule-                            et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023;
               following benchmark, RuleBench, for evaluating                           Zhao et al., 2023). However, the inferential rule-
           the inferential rule-following capability of LLMs.                           following capability of LLMs is far from satisfac-
         • We evaluated the capabilities of inferential rule-                            tory. No prior work has comprehensively evaluated
                following of multiple open-source and closed-                             whether LLMs can benefit from the provided rules
              source LLMs on various tasks and rule settings,                              under different scenarios and how LLMs can fol-
             and categorized their inferential rule-following                          low the rules better. To make up for this gap, this
           abilities into 5 dimensions. Based on the results,                             paper conducted a series of experiments to eval-
               we analyze the possible reasons that limit the                          uate the inferential rule-following capabilities of
           inferential rule-following capabilities of current                               several open-source and closed-source LLMs and
                  LLMs and provide some insights into the im-                               provide some insights into how LLMs can follow
              provements for LLMs toward a better inferential        rules better.

                                                      3

    2.2 LLMs Instruction-following                           4    Evaluation
    Instruction-following has been generally consid-             To comprehensively evaluate the inferential rule-
    ered an important capability of LLMs (Zhong et al.,          following capabilities of LLMs, based on the pro-
    2021; Mishra et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021; Yin               posed RuleBench, this paper has designed 5 main
    et al., 2023), and some previous works have been         parts of experiments. We evaluate the effects of rule
    done to evaluate the instruction-following capabil-         quantity (§4.2), rule form (§4.3), the presence of
    ity of LLMs (Zhou et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024).         CoT when applying rules (§4.4), and rule factuality
    However, only a few works have cast their atten-         (§4.5). Besides, we analyzed the failure cases of in-
    tion to the question of inferential rule-following.        ferential rule-following from a behavioral perspec-
    Recent works focused on the rule-following capa-              tive, classifying them into Triggering Error and
    bility of LLMs (Mu et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024;            Execution Error (§4.6). Based on these evaluation
    Chen et al., 2024) confined the rule-following to        results, we categorize the inferential rule-following
    instruction-following. Instead, this paper proposes             capabilities into 5 dimensions and compare the
    the scenario of inferential rule-following and sets            performances of 7 open-source and closed-source
    up useful baselines for future works.                          LLMs (§4.7). The test-time prompts used in this
                                                             section can be found in Appendix C.

    3   RuleBench                                            4.1   Model Selections
        For open-source LLMs, we adopt Llama-2-7b-
To construct RuleBench, we have leveraged and re- chat (Touvron et al., 2023), Meta-Llama-3-8B
processed the existing reasoning benchmarks for (AI@Meta, 2024), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang
different inferential rule-following scenarios, in- et al., 2023) and Yi (Young et al., 2024). For closed-
cluding relation extraction (CLUTRR, Sinha et al. source LLMs, we adopt gpt-3.5-turbo, gpt-4-turbo
2019), content moderation (SALAD, Li et al. 2024), (OpenAI, 2023), and gpt-4o from OpenAI. The
commonsense QA (DEER, Yang et al. 2022 and comprehensive performance comparison of them is
ULogic, Wang et al. 2024), mathematics QA (The- shown in Figure 2 and the explanation and analysis
oremQa, Chen et al. 2023), and judgment predic- is in §4.7.
tion (CAIL2018, Xiao et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 4.2 Inferential Rules Are Helpful for the
    2018).      The details of the construction of each            Reasoning of LLMs
    benchmark and the prompts used during construct-
    ing RuleBench can be found in Appendix B.                    To evaluate whether inferential rules are helpful
   Under the scenarios introduced above, As shown for the reasoning of LLMs, we adopt the following
in Figure 3, RuleBench involves multiple settings settings to test the LLMs.
of inferential rule-following, to comprehensively • No Rule. This setting simply prompts the LLMs
    evaluate the LLMs from different perspectives. The         with the original question and without the infer-
    settings include rule quantity (i.e. how many rules        ential rules.
are provided to the LLMs while only one of them • Golden Rule. This setting prompts the LLMs
    applies to the current case), rule form (i.e. which        with the golden rule (i.e. an inferential rule that
    form the rules illustrated in, natural language or for-       should be applied to the question) together with
    mal language), the presence of Chain-of-Thought            the original question.
when applying rules (i.e. directly generate the an- • Few Rule. This setting prompts the LLMs with
    swer based on the question and rules, or trying                 the golden rule and two random noise rules to-
    verbally apply the rule to the question before an-         gether with the original question.
swering it), and rule factuality (i.e. whether the • All Rule. This setting is similar to Few Rule
    conclusion of the rule is factual or counterfactual).      while the number of noise rules increases to 30.
    RuleBench allows us to analyze the failure cases                 This setting simulates a scenario where users
    of inferential rule-following from a behavioral per-             prompt the LLMs with all possible inferential
    spective, classifying them into Triggering Error              rules in the tasks instead of the relevant rules
    (i.e. LLMs fail to trigger the golden rule) and Ex-        retrieved based on the query.
    ecution Error (i.e.     LLMs success to trigger the              All these rule settings are tested in a zero-
    golden rule but fail to execute the golden rule).        shot manner.            As shown in Figure 4, in most

        4

                                               No Rule  All Rule   Few Rule   Golden Rule

         gpt-4o            Llama-2-7b-chat  gpt-3.5-turbo  Yi-1.5-6B-Chat        gpt-4-turbo          Llama-3-8B  Mistral-7B-Instruct
     100

      50

       0
     100

      50

       0
     100

      50

       0
     100

      50

       0
     100

      50

       0
     100

      50

       0

                            Figure 4: The inferential rule-following performance of LLMs under different rule quantities.

     Model                 Form CAIL2018        SALAD     TheoremQA              CLUTRR               ULogic          DEER
                                 All        Few     All   Few       All      Few    All       Few     All     Few     All         Few
     gpt-4o                FOL  95.78       95.18  92.93  96.20    70.36     69.45  43.13     43.10   87.59   70.60   73.81     38.10
                           NL   96.99       97.59  95.19  95.35    69.45     69.45  58.97     62.67   94.82   79.16   92.86     71.43
     Llama-2-7b-chat-hf    FOL  50.60       53.01  58.27  81.22    39.16     38.18  23.00     27.48   60.36   79.04   57.14     71.43
                           NL   53.61       63.25  72.59  88.91    39.00     35.96  24.33     40.36   60.00   83.86   59.52     59.52
     gpt-3.5-turbo         FOL  84.94       86.14  73.33  96.83    49.82     53.26  41.54     53.28   63.73   66.10   71.43     78.57
                           NL   90.36       89.76  80.64  99.24    50.18     50.36  42.32     59.36   80.72   70.48   78.57     83.33
     Yi-1.5-6B-Chat        FOL  96.99       97.59  64.36  70.28    53.27     52.00  23.95     23.47   90.12   81.93   64.29     52.38
                           NL   96.99       95.78  75.73  80.44    52.00     49.64  17.27     21.37   87.59   82.77   73.81     66.67
     gpt-4-turbo           FOL  96.39       95.78  93.25  93.72    66.55     65.09  46.95     53.99   98.43   98.55   90.48     88.10
                           NL   96.99       98.80  94.81  94.70    66.36     64.36  49.32     53.92   98.43   98.67   88.10     90.48
     Meta-Llama-3-8B       FOL  89.16       93.98  77.71  77.16    48.91     50.73  38.55     41.89   92.17   97.23   83.33     80.95
                           NL   89.76       97.59  82.28  77.92    48.18     48.55  37.40     45.52   92.17   95.06   85.71     85.71
     Mistral-7B-Instruct   FOL  78.31       79.52  72.62  80.54    17.45     21.45  25.10     29.20   86.75   92.41   64.29     64.29
                           NL   84.34       92.77  82.36  83.43    22.18     24.55  26.62     32.73   95.42   94.46   57.14     64.29

        Table 1: The of LLMs on RuleBench with rules of formal language (FOL) and natural language (NL).

    cases, LLMs enjoy great performance improve-                   4.3       LLMs Prefer Natural Language Rules
    ments while being prompted with one golden infer-                        than Formal Language Rules
    ential rule (No Rule → Golden Rule). Neverthe-
             less, as the number of noise rules increases, LLMs    Formal language is widely used in early Artifi-
           will find it hard to trigger and leverage the golden    cial Intelligence, which is able to conduct efficient
                  rule and thus have a performance drop (Golden    and generalized reasoning. However, LLMs have
    Rule → Few Rule → All Rule).                                   shown competitive or even superior reasoning per-
                                                                   formance over traditional formal language rule-
                                                                   based engines, i.e. Knowledge Graphs (Luo et al.,
                 Besides, we find that by following inferential    2023). In contrast to formal language rule-based
    rules, LLMs have better performance improve-                   reasoning, reasoning with LLMs is more flexible
    ments on tasks that require complex reasoning,                 and robust to various data and tasks. Therefore, we
    such as CLUTRR and CAIL2018. On the com-                                           would like to know if we can combine these two
    monsense reasoning tasks, as the LLMs have para-               paradigms, i.e. whether LLMs can follow formal
                 metric knowledge, the performance improvements    language rules.
          brought by following inferential rules are relatively                            To evaluate whether LLMs can follow formal
    slim. Moreover, we find that all LLMs fail to fol-             language rules, we transform the natural language
                  low the inferential rules in TheoremQA, which    rules of each benchmark into the form of First-
            illustrates the defect of current LLMs that can not    Order Logic (FOL) by executing deterministic func-
    follow complex mathematical or physical rules.                 tions or prompting ChatGPT (Appendix B). Then

                                                5










DEER ULogic CLUTRR TheoremQA SALAD CAIL2018

                                        w/o CoT      Positive Delta    Negative Delta
        gpt-4o  Llama-2-7b-chat         Yi-1.5-6B-Chat  gpt-3.5-turbo  gpt-4-turbo     Meta-Llama-3-8B Mistral-7B-Instruct
    100
     50
      0
    100
     50
      0
    100
     50
      0
    100
     50
      0
    100
     50
      0
    100
     50
      0 Golden  Few Golden Few          Golden Few  Golden        Few  Golden     Few   Golden Few     Golden Few

    Figure 5: The inferential rule-following performance of LLMs when applying rules with or without using Chain-of-
    Thought. The dashed box indicates the improvement (positive or negative) of w/ CoT over w/o CoT.

    we compare the reasoning performances of LLMs           CoT have not exhibited stronger inferential rule-
    which are prompted by different forms of inferen-       following performances in most cases. This may
    tial rules in both All Rule and Few Rule settings.      be attributed to the lack of planning of CoT. CoT
   As shown in Table 1, in most cases, LLMs con- conducts straightforward reasoning from the ques-
duct reasoning better with natural language rules tion to the answer with multiple reasoning hops.
than formal language rules (except for TheoremQA However, when applying the inferential rules, it
and Yi-1.5-6B-chat). This aligns with our intu- involves trying to apply each rule to the current
ition that LLMs are mostly pre-trained with natural question and thinking about whether to execute
language and thus the inferential rules expressed this rule. Therefore, plain CoT is inadequate for
with natural language are closer to the pre-trained LLMs to apply the inferential rules. Prompting
distributions of LLMs than the inferential rules ex- techniques (e.g. Tree of Thought, Yao et al. 2024)
pressed with formal language. This confirms the or decoding algorithms (e.g. KCTS, Choi et al.
research motivation and value of Symbol-LLM (Xu 2023) that involve planning steps are needed for
et al., 2023). Nevertheless, in most cases, LLMs helping LLMs to apply the inferential rules.
still can follow the formal language rules. This
reveals the possibility of learning formal language 4.5 LLMs Struggle to Follow Counterfactual
    rules from a symbolic reasoning engine and then                    Inferential Rules
    using LLMs for neural inference.                        Although we have verified the effectiveness of
4.4 Chain of Thought Is Inadequate for LLMs the inferential rules, it is still unclear whether
     to Apply Inferential Rules                             LLMs strictly follow the given inferential rules
                                                            or merely the rules activate their parametric knowl-
    Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022) has been            edge. Therefore, we designed the scenario of coun-
      widely verified as a useful prompting technique to    terfactual rule-following.
    help LLMs conduct multi-hop reasoning. To evalu-                          To evaluate whether LLMs can follow counter-
    ate whether LLMs can use CoT to apply inferential       factual rules, we construct corresponding coun-
    rules in the inferential rule-following scenario, we    terfactual benchmarks and rule sets of CLUTRR,
    choose the few-shot Golden Rule and Few Rule            SALAD, ULogic, and CAIL2018. Specifically, we
    settings. We created two demonstrations with CoT        replace the ground truth of each question and the
    and two demonstrations without CoT under such           conclusion of the corresponding rule with a random
    settings for LLMs to conduct In-context Learning.       incorrect answer. So in this counterfactual setting,
                However, as shown in Figure 5, LLMs with    the LLMs are supposed to generate the “incorrect

                                                         6










DEER ULogic CLUTRR TheoremQA SALAD CAIL2018

 Model                     Factuality   CAIL2018        SALAD    CLUTRR     ULogic
                                    Golden        Few   Golden  Few   Golden   Few  Golden  Few
 gpt-4o                    Factual  98.19       96.99   99.74  97.93  81.18  65.46  88.71  96.55
                           C.F.     97.14       97.14    8.22  68.42  37.50   5.53  86.87  88.80
 Llama-2-7b-chat           Factual  62.65       70.63   70.68  41.54  77.58  37.79  91.81  87.71
                           C.F.     79.25       67.21   26.06  52.12  71.37  13.93  67.35  53.61
 Yi-1.5-6B-Chat            Factual  98.19       95.18   87.15  66.27  78.72  37.02  98.55  97.71
                           C.F.     87.43       80.57   71.24  56.68  70.13  19.27  73.61  71.08
 gpt-3.5-turbo             Factual  99.40       98.19   99.74  99.48  95.49  63.83  97.11  96.75
                           C.F.     97.14       91.43   100.0  100.0  98.50  43.86  81.69  75.78
 gpt-4-turbo               Factual  99.40       98.19   100.0  97.98  82.70  63.49  98.58  98.31
                           C.F.     99.43       100.0   12.93  77.55  78.72  36.16  86.51  86.99
 Meta-Llama-3-8B           Factual  89.16       86.14   96.09  93.35  62.21  40.17  98.92  98.80
                           C.F.     62.29       86.29   100.0  94.00  39.50   6.49  79.64  75.90
 Mistral-7B-Instruct       Factual  98.19       88.55   90.88  88.19  50.38  35.88  97.17  93.36
                           C.F.     88.00       65.14   62.10  87.48  26.15  13.26  33.61  24.10

                                                     Table 2: The performance of LLMs on RuleBench when following factual and counterfactual (C.F.) rules.

answer” based on the given counterfactual rules.            From the results shown in Figure 6, we can tell
           As shown in Table 2, in most cases of both   that when tackling different tasks, LLMs exhibit
    Golden Rule and Few Rule settings, LLMs have sig-   different behaviors in following rules. While rules
      nificant performance drops when following coun-   have a heavy head for triggering (e.g. in CLUTRR
    terfactual rules, compared with following factual   and CAIL2018, the rule head will be a series of rela-
   rules. These results indicate that the performance   tional hops among characters), the LLMs are likely
   improvements brought by following rules are partly   to make Triggering Errors. While the rule head
      attributed to the parametric knowledge of LLMs,   is easy and commonsensical (e.g. in SALAD and
besides following inferential rules.                    ULogic), but the conclusion of the rule body is am-
                                                        biguous or confused (the counterfactual scenario),
4.6   Behavioral Analysis of LLMs Following             the LLMs are likely to make Execution Errors. A
      Inferential Rules                                 case study of these two types of failures can be
      To understand why LLMs fail to follow the given   found in Appendix E.
  inferential rules in the reasoning process, we made   To avoid Triggering Errors          in the scenario
   a behavioral analysis of LLMs in the failure cases   of rule-enhanced reasoning with RAG paradigm
    of LLMs inferential rule-following. Specifically,  (§2.1), the rule retriever plays a crucial role. The
     we adopt the few-shot Few Rule settings for LLMs  Triggering Errors can be eliminated if the rule re-
  to follow the rule-applying demonstrations to apply   triever only retrieved the golden rules. However,
 the given inferential rules to the current question.   existing works mostly employ simple sparse retriev-
   We ordered the LLMs first to choose an inferential   ers such as BM25 (Yang et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
     rule to follow and then reason with it. By pars-   2023), which greatly compromises the inferential
   ing the output of LLMs we can classify the failure   rule-following performance of LLMs.
    cases of LLMs inferential rule-following into two     To avoid Execution Errors in following rules, the
categories: Triggering Error and Execution Error.       LLMs need to faithfully execute the rule body and
      Triggering Error indicates that the LLMs choose   avoid generating conclusions of illusions. There-
 a noise rule for the current case and therefore lead   fore, users may avoid letting LLMs follow the rules
    to an incorrect reasoning result. Execution Error   that are counterfactual or out of the pre-trained dis-
    indicates that although LLMs have chosen the cor-   tribution of LLMs before they fine-tune the LLMs
rect rule for the current case, they fail to draw the   to adapt to those domains or specific tasks.
   correct conclusion of rule body. To faithfully de-
    scribe the inferential rule-following behavior of   4.7      Inferential Rule-Following Capabilities of
     LLMs instead of being affected by the parametric       LLMs
     knowledge of LLMs, we run the analysis under the   To make a comprehensive evaluation of the infer-
  counterfactual settings of the selected benchmarks.   ential rule-following capability of the LLMs, we

                                                                                                       7

      Triggering Error   Execution Error                    Dataset   CLUTRR      SALAD      CAIL2018
  Mistral-7B-Instruct    SALAD                              base      40.36       88.91      63.25
           Llama-3-8B                                       IRFT      42.94       91.80      67.44
          gpt-4-turbo
       Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
        gpt-3.5-turbo
   Llama-2-7b-chat-hf                                       Dataset   TheoremQA   ULogic     DEER
               gpt-4o
                  Error Proportion
                     CLUTRR                                 base      35.52       79.64      52.38
  Mistral-7B-Instruct
           Llama-3-8B                                       IRFT      43.03       87.83      61.90
          gpt-4-turbo
       Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
        gpt-3.5-turbo
   Llama-2-7b-chat-hf                                   Table 3:        The performances of base and fine-tuned
               gpt-4o
                  Error Proportion                      Llama-2-7b-chat on all datasets of RuleBench. The fine-
  Mistral-7B-Instruct     CAIL2018                      tuning data is constructed using StringGame’s OOD
           Llama-3-8B                                   synthetic data. Tested in zero-shot Few Rule setting.
          gpt-4-turbo
       Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
        gpt-3.5-turbo
   Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
               gpt-4o
                  Error Proportion                      rule. The tuning objective can be formalized as:
                     ULogic
  Mistral-7B-Instruct
           Llama-3-8B
          gpt-4-turbo                                   JIRF T   = Erq,r,a∼ptrain −log p(a|[q; r; r1, ..., rn])
       Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
        gpt-3.5-turbo
   Llama-2-7b-chat-hf                                           1,...,rn∼U(R)
               gpt-4o
      0      20      40         60    80      100
                  Error Proportion                      Where the q, r, a stands for the question, the golden
Figure 6: The proportion of Triggering Error and Exe-   rule, and the answer from the training set, respec-
cution Error produced by LLMs on RuleBench.             tively. ri ∼ U (R) stands for randomly sampling n
                                                        rules from the entire rule sets as the noise rules.
                                                              To thoroughly separate the rule-following ability
categorize the experimental results in the previous     from domain knowledge, we propose to use purely
sections into 5 dimensions: Executing Rules, Trig-      synthetic data to construct the corpus, StringGame,
gering Rules, Following Formal Rules, Apply-            for IRFT. The details of StringGame can be found
ing Rules, and Following Counterfactual Rules.          in Appendix G.
The details of these dimensions are shown in Ap-                  As shown in Table 3, after training with IRFT
pendix F.                                               on StringGame, the LLM enjoys a performance
  As shown in Figure 2, while the closed-source         improvement on all tasks of RuleBench. We also
LLMs show dominant performances in the scenario         evaluate both the base LLM and tuned LLM on
of inferential rule-following, some open-source         an instruction-following benchmark, InfoBench,
LLMs, like Llama-3-8B, exhibit competitive per-         where their accuracies are 74.36% and 74.49%, re-
formances and have balanced capabilities in all         spectively. Based on these results, we believe that
dimensions. Among the closed-source LLMs, gpt-          inferential rule-following is an abstract and fun-
4-turbo is more capable of following formal lan-        damental capability. Through IRFT, this capabil-
guage rules while gpt-3.5-turbo shows a stronger        ity can be abstracted and learned from purely syn-
capability of following counterfactual rules.           thetic symbolic tasks, allowing generalization to
  Generally, LLMs are not very good at inferen-         real-world rule-following tasks. Meanwhile, IRFT
tial rule-following. This may be attributed to the      does not affect their general instruction-following
lack of training in inferential rule-following in the   ability. We also test using in-domain data for IRFT
current LLMs. In the next section, we propose a         (Appendix H), and the performance improvements
fine-tuning method to effectively further improve       brought by IRFT are more significant.
the inferential rule-following capabilities of LLMs.
                                                        6   Conclusion
5 Inferential Rule-Following Tuning                     In  this  paper, we  introduce   inferential      rule-
To further improve the inferential rule-following       following as a vital capability of LLMs and dis-
capabilities of LLMs, we propose Inferential in-        tinguish it from the previous labors on instruction-
ferential rule-following Tuning (IRFT). IRFT in-        following. We then construct and propose a new
volves a golden rule with a few randomly sampled        benchmark, RuleBench, for evaluating the infer-
noise rules in the prompt and therefore orders the      ential rule-following capabilities of LLMs. Based
LLMs to learn to trigger and execute the golden         on RuleBench, we conduct a series of experiments

      8

       to evaluate the inferential rule-following capabil-   Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
             ities of 7 open-source and closed-source LLMs    sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
        from different perspectives. We categorize the in-    de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
       ferential rule-following capability in 5 dimensions    laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023. Mistral
           and provide some insights into improvements for    7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825.
       LLMs toward a better inferential rule-following in-   Lijun Li, Bowen Dong, Ruohui Wang, Xuhao Hu, Wang-
      telligent agent. Finally, we propose the Inferential    meng Zuo, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Jing Shao.
           Rule-Following Tuning (IRFT), which further im-    2024. Salad-bench: A hierarchical and comprehen-
                                                              sive safety benchmark for large language models.
     proves the inferential rule-following capabilities of    arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05044.
    LLMs.                                                    Linhao Luo, Jiaxin Ju, Bo Xiong, Yuan-Fang Li, Gho-
    Limitations                                               lamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. 2023.    Chatrule:
                                                              Mining logical rules with large language models
                Although IRFT has shown remarkable perfor-    for knowledge graph reasoning.       arXiv preprint
            mances on RuleBench, beyond using IRFT on spe-    arXiv:2309.01538.
         cific downstream tasks, we are looking forward to       Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
          extending IRFT to the pre-training stage of LLMs    Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
                                                              Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
       (like IFT), such that it is possible to enable LLMs    et al. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with
          to master more basic and generalized inferential    self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651.
    rule-following capabilities.                               Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and
    Ethics Statement                                          Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Cross-task generaliza-
                                                              tion via natural language crowdsourcing instructions.
            Our research aims to evaluate the inferential-    arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773.
inferential rule-following capability of LLMs. To Norman Mu, Sarah Chen, Zifan Wang, Sizhe
        mitigate risks associated with some sensitive con-    Chen, David Karamardian, Lulwa Aljeraisy, Dan
       tent in the benchmark, we restrict access to autho-    Hendrycks, and David Wagner. 2023. Can llms fol-
        low simple rules? arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04235.
rized researchers who adhere to strict ethical guide- OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint,
        lines. These measures safeguard research integrity    arXiv:2303.08774.
    while minimizing potential harm.                         Yiwei Qin, Kaiqiang Song, Yebowen Hu, Wenlin Yao,
                                                              Sangwoo Cho, Xiaoyang Wang, Xuansheng Wu, Fei
    References                                                Liu, Pengfei Liu, and Dong Yu. 2024.     Infobench:
                                                              Evaluating instruction following ability in large lan-
    AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card.                        guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03601.
          Wenhu Chen, Ming Yin, Max Ku, Pan Lu, Yixin Wan,   Emilio Ribes-Inesta. 2000. Instructions, rules, and ab-
              Xueguang Ma, Jianyu Xu, Xinyi Wang, and Tony    straction: A misconstrued relation.    Behavior and
           Xia. 2023. Theoremqa: A theorem-driven question    philosophy, pages 41–55.
          answering dataset. In The 2023 Conference on Em-
     pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.         Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath.
                                                              2023. Reflexion:       an autonomous agent with dy-
     Xinyi Chen, Baohao Liao, Jirui Qi, Panagiotis Eustra-    namic memory and self-reflection.    arXiv preprint
       tiadis, Christof Monz, Arianna Bisazza, and Maarten    arXiv:2303.11366.
         de Rijke. 2024. The sifo benchmark: Investigating
     the sequential instruction following ability of large        Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle
     language models. ArXiv, abs/2406.19999.                  Pineau, and William L Hamilton. 2019. Clutrr: A
                                                              diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from
             Sehyun Choi, Tianqing Fang, Zhaowei Wang, and    text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06177.
           Yangqiu Song. 2023. Kcts: knowledge-constrained
       tree search decoding with token-level hallucination     Wangtao Sun, Xuanqing Yu, Shizhu He, Jun Zhao, and
     detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09044.              Kang Liu. 2023. Expnote: Black-box large language
                                                              models are better task solvers with experience note-
        Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y Halpern, and Moshe Y Vardi.    book. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07032.
     1992.   What is an inference rule?     The Journal of
     symbolic logic, 57(3):1018–1045.                        Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
                                                              bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
             Yi Hu, Xiaojuan Tang, Haotong Yang, and Muhan    Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
     Zhang. 2024.  Case-based or rule-based:           How    Bhosale, et al. 2023.   Llama 2:    Open founda-
     do transformers do the math?           arXiv preprint    tion and fine-tuned chat models.     arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2402.17709.                                        arXiv:2307.09288.

         9

      Siyuan Wang, Zhongyu Wei, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren.     Haoxi Zhong, Chaojun Xiao, Zhipeng Guo, Cunchao Tu,
    2024. Can llms reason with rules? logic scaffolding            Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yansong Feng, Xianpei
    for stress-testing and improving llms.  arXiv preprint          Han, Zhen Hu, Heng Wang, et al. 2018. Overview
    arXiv:2402.11442.                                          of cail2018: Legal judgment prediction competition.
          Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin   arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05851.
    Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-              Ruiqi Zhong, Kristy Lee, Zheng Zhang, and Dan Klein.
    drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2021. Finetuned lan-            2021. Adapting language models for zero-shot learn-
    guage models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint      ing by meta-tuning on dataset and prompt collections.
    arXiv:2109.01652.                                        arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.04670.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Sid-
    Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022.                 dhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou,
    Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large    and Le Hou. 2023.        Instruction-following evalu-
    language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903.        ation for large language models.       arXiv preprint
       Chaojun Xiao, Haoxi Zhong, Zhipeng Guo, Cunchao Tu,   arXiv:2311.07911.
    Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yansong Feng, Xianpei
    Han, Zhen Hu, Heng Wang, et al. 2018. Cail2018:                    Zhaocheng Zhu, Yuan Xue, Xinyun Chen, Denny
    A large-scale legal dataset for judgment prediction.         Zhou, Jian Tang, Dale Schuurmans, and Hanjun Dai.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02478.                            2023. Large language models can learn rules. arXiv
        preprint arXiv:2310.07064.
Fangzhi Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Qiushi Sun, Siyu Ren, Fei
  Yuan, Shuai Yuan, Qika Lin, Yu Qiao, and Jun Liu. A Instructions vs Rules
  2023. Symbol-llm: Towards foundational symbol-
  centric interface for large language models. arXiv Nevertheless, we can not confine rules to instruc-
    preprint arXiv:2311.09278.                                     tions, or even identify rules with instructions
Zeyuan Yang, Peng Li, and Yang Liu. 2023. Fail- (Ribes-Inesta, 2000). Specifically, instructions are
  ures pave the way: Enhancing large language mod- specific and direct behavioral guidelines that an
  els through tuning-free rule accumulation. arXiv agent can follow without understanding the back-
    preprint arXiv:2310.15746.                                   ground behind them. Rules, on the other hand, are
Zonglin Yang, Li Dong, Xinya Du, Hao Cheng, Erik abstract policies and require conditional judgment.
  Cambria, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu An agent often needs to decide which rule to trigger
  Wei. 2022. Language models as inductive reason- based on the specific context, thereby governing
    ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10923.                      their behaviors (Ribes-Inesta, 2000). Note that al-
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, though the inferential rules shown in Figure 1 are
  Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. commonsense, they can also be domain-specific,
  2024. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving
  with large language models. Advances in Neural and even counterfactual, which depends on the
    Information Processing Systems, 36.                          needs of users. Therefore, rule-following scenar-
          Wenpeng Yin, Qinyuan Ye, Pengfei Liu, Xiang Ren,    ios should not be limited to only following detailed
    and Hinrich Schütze. 2023. LLM-driven instruction        task descriptions or steps, but to dynamically choos-
    following: Progresses and concerns. In Proceedings            ing the correct rules and making decisions based
    of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-      on the current cases. Following (Fagin et al., 1992),
    ural Language Processing: Tutorial Abstracts, pages       we call this type of rule inferential rule and named
    19–25, Singapore. Association for Computational
    Linguistics.                                                the scenario considered in this paper LLM inferen-
Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, tial rule-following.
  Ge Zhang, Guanwei Zhang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng B Details of Constructing RuleBench
  Zhu, Jianqun Chen, Jing Chang, et al. 2024. Yi:
  Open foundation models by 01. ai. arXiv preprint Here are the details of constructing each benchmark
    arXiv:2403.04652.                                               in RuleBench. The prompts used in this process
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Good- are shown in Figure 10,11,12,13,14.
  man. 2022. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with rea- • CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019). Suite CLUTRR
  soning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
    Systems, 35:15476–15488.                                    contains a large set of semi-synthetic stories in-
           Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu       volving hypothetical families. Given a story, the
    Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2023.  Expel:                goal is to infer the kinship between two family
    Llm agents are experiential learners. arXiv preprint             members, which is not explicitly mentioned in
    arXiv:2308.10144.                                                the story. The testing set of CLUTRR contains

        10

  1048 samples in all, with their reasoning hops is a mathematics problem dataset, characterized
  varying from 2 to 10. As the suite CLUTRR by the fact that each question and answer has a
  contains the oracle relation chain for each data corresponding theorem. TheoremQA comprises
  sample itself, we write a deterministic function 800 QA pairs covering 350+ theorems spanning
  to transform this information into the rule for across Math, EE&CS, Physics, and Finance. In
  each data sample. For the answer evaluation, we this dataset, each math problem is associated with
  extract all the kinships mentioned in the answer a corresponding theorem, but the theorems are
  texts and select the last one to compare with the not strict inferential rules. Therefore, we used
  ground truth kinship. gpt-4-turbo to transform each theorem into an “if
• SALAD (Li et al., 2024). We adopt SALAD, a ... then ...” rule format. The types of answers
  safety benchmark specifically designed for eval- in the TheoremQA dataset include option, bool,
  uating LLMs, for the scenario of content moder- integer, float, and list. Since list-type answers are
  ation. Given a piece of toxic text, the goal is to more difficult to parse, we discarded the ques-
  classify it into one of 6 different categories. The tions with this type of answer. Finally, we added
  testing set of SALAD contains 5939 samples in corresponding noise answers for bool, integer,
  all. As there is no auxiliary inference informa- and float types to unify all questions into a single-
  tion contained in SALAD, we adopt ChatGPT choice option format for evaluation.
  to generate a corresponding inferential rule for • ULogic (Wang et al., 2024). Ulogic employs
  each data sample. Specifically, we create a rule a "logic scaffolding inferential rule generation
  generation instruction and two demonstrations framework" for the generation of primitive rules
  manually. They are prompted to ChatGPT to- and rule composition. The resulting inferential
  gether with each sample in SALAD. Based on rule base is ULogic, in which each example is
  In-context Learning (ICL), ChatGPT will gen- paired with a rule. We used a subset that has
  erate a corresponding inferential rule for each been verified by the authors for reasonable infer-
  sample. For the answer evaluation, we extract ence, comprising 1100 samples. All the rules in
  the last category ID in the answer texts to com- this dataset are inferential rules, and it can eas-
  pare with the ground truth category. Note that, as ily extract the premise and conclusion from each
  SALAD involves identifying toxic content, the rule. However, each rule lacks an instantiated spe-
  safety-aligned LLMs will probably refuse to an- cific question-answer pair. Therefore, we used
  swer the question (Despite the questions of the gpt-4-turbo to generate a corresponding question
  SALAD being to have LLMs classify toxic con- context based on the instantiation of the premise
  tent, rather than inducing them to generate toxic of each inferential rule and generated a question
  content). We recognize and discard these cases sentence based on the corresponding conclusion
  by checking if any word like sorry or cannot is statement. In this way, each inferential rule is
  contained in the answer texts. accompanied by an instantiated question, and we
• DEER (Yang et al., 2022). DEER is proposed as have added candidate distractor answers to form
  a 1.2k rule-fact pairs dataset, about natural and option format.
  social sciences. Although the rules contained • CAIL2018 (Xiao et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2018).
  in DEER are all induced from their correspond- Cail2018 is the official data set of the 2018 China
  ing facts, the facts themselves do not appear to Law Research Cup, which contains 183 articles
  be testable questions. Thus we transform it into of law, 202 charges, and a large number of judg-
  a single-choice question-answering benchmark. ment documents. Given a legal document, the
  We prompt the ChatGPT with two manually cre- goal is to determine which crime the defendant
  ated cases to guide it to generate a multi-choice will be charged in the document. The CAIL2018
  question and the corresponding answer based on data provides the clauses violated by the defen-
  the given rule. All question-answer pairs are then dant and the charges to be charged. We write a
  verified by humans. For the answer evaluation, function to extract the corresponding clause con-
  we extract the first option (A, B, C, or D) in the tent from the 2018 Criminal Law of the People’s
  answer texts and compare it with the ground truth Republic of China based on the clause ID in the
  option. data, and then convert the corresponding clause
• TheoremQA (Chen et al., 2023). TheoremQA content and charges into rule samples for each


    11

        Prompt Triggering Error Prompt Execution Error

Please answer the question by choosing the correct rule and Please answer the question by choosing the correct rule and
reasoning with it. reasoning with it.
<rule> <rule>
if A has a brother B, B has a brother C, C has a sister D, D has a if A has a son B, B has a uncle C, C has a daughter D, D has a
daughter E, E has a brother F, F has a brother G, G has a sister sister E, E has a brother F, and A is female, F is male, then F is
H, and A is female, H is female, then H is the daughter of A. the father-in-law of A.
if A has a son B, B has a grandfather C, C has a daughter D, and if A has a daughter B, B has a sister C, C has a mother D, D has
A is female, D is female, then D is the father-in-law of A. a son E, E has a wife F, F has a son G, G has a sister H, H has a
if A has a brother B, B has a brother C, C has a brother D, D has brother I, and A is male, I is male, then I is the daughter-in-law
a daughter E, E has a aunt F, F has a father G, G has a son H, H of A.
has a son I, I has a mother J, J has a son K, and A is female, K is if A has a father B, B has a son C, C has a son D, D has a aunt E,
male, then K is the grandfather of A. E has a son F, F has a brother G, G has a sister H, and A is
<\rule> female, H is female, then H is the daughter of A.
<question> <\rule>
[Harry] invited his sister [Maria] to dinner this Friday because it <question>
is her birthday. [Stephen] likes to sing with his brother [Jennifer] was glad to see her father, [James], at her dance
[William]. [William]'s sister [Gayle] hates when they sing. recital. [Jerry] took his son [Daniel] out to play gold later that
[Paul] was playing checkers with his brother [Harry]. [Paul]'s night. [Gayle] was mad at her son, [Harry]. She found he'd been
sister [Susan] was waiting to play. [Gayle] asked her daughter, stealing from her purse. [Paul] asked his brother [Harry] if he
[Susan], if she would like to go to a movie with her on Saturday would come help him fix his car next weekend. [Paul] and his
night. [Marguerite] went to her brother [Stephen]'s birthday sister [Susan] went out for ice cream. [James] 'son, [Daniel],
party aced his math class and made his father proud. [Gayle] loves
Who is Maria to Marguerite? going to the park with her daughter's son. His name is [Jerry].
<\question> Who is Susan to Jennifer?
<answer> <\question>
        <answer>

        Output

The third rule can be applied to this question. Based on the third Output
rule, Marguerite has a brother Stephen, Stephen has a brother
William, William has a sister Gayle, Gayle has a daughter Susan, The third rule can be applied to this question. Based on the third
Susan has a brother Paul, Paul has a sister Maria, and Marguerite rule, Jennifer has a father James, James has a son Daniel, Daniel
is female, Maria is female, so Maria is the grandfather of has a brother Harry, Harry has a brother Paul, and Jennifer is
Marguerite. female, Paul is male, so Paul is the daughter-in-law of Jennifer.

        GroundTruth GroundTruth

daughter daughter


    Figure 7: An example of Triggering Error on CLUTRR.      Figure 8: An example of Execution Error on CLUTRR.

     data. The output of the model is first filtered and     frequent labels while ensuring that their amount is
     then compared with the answer for evaluation.           no less than 10% of the total dataset in SALAD
    C  Test-time Prompts                                     (As their labels are meaningful) to serve as long-tail
                                                             instances.
    The prompts used during test-time are shown in           As shown in Table 4, closed-source LLMs (gpt-
    Figure 15,16,17,18,19,20. Please note that golden        4o, gpt-4-turbo, gpt-3.5-turbo), compared with the
    rules don’t always appear first; they are mixed with     performance on overall instances, although they
    noise rules in random order during testing. The          have performance drops when following only in-
    orders in these figures are for illustrative purposes.   structions (No Rule) on long-tail instances, still
    D  Evaluation of Inferential                             achieve competitive performance while following
       Rule-following on Long-tail Instances                 inferential rules (All Rule, Few Rule, Golden Rule).
                                                             This indicates that for closed-source LLMs, the im-
    To verify if following inferential rules is more bene-   provement brought by following inferential rules
    ficial when encountering long-tail instances, we se-     on long-tail instances is greater compared to reg-
    lected instances with labels that are among the least    ular instances. However, for open-source LLMs,

           12

         we found that they experience significant perfor-   Example of StringGame
         mance drops when following only instructions, and
        strangely, the effectiveness decreases with an in-   Input: YTNRCMTZTVEAVQEHVJHW
          crease in the number of noise rules, opposite to   Rules:
    their behavior on the overall instances (Section 4.2).   1. If the length of the string is even, then
           This indicates that these open-source LLMs have             output the number of unique conso-
       poor inferential rule-following capabilities on the    nants in the string.
    distributions of long-tail samples.
                                                                  2. If the number of "G"s is equal to 3,
    E Case Study of Behavioral Analysis                            then output the index of the first "G"
                                                              (index begins from 0).
          To better illustrate what happens when LLMs fail     3. If the string starts with a vowel, then
        to follow the inferential rules, we show two cases      output the total number of letters in the
             in which LLMs experience the Triggering Error    string divided by 2.
        (Figure 7) and Execution Error (Figure 8), respec-
    tively.                                                     4. If the string starts and ends with the
              In the case of Triggering Error, LLMs appear         same letter, then output the index (1-
        to trigger an noise rule and consequently draw the          based) of the first occurrence of the
         wrong answer. In the case of Execution Error, al-    letter "R".
          though LLMs have triggered the golden rule, how-
         ever, they fail to apply the rule to the question    Output: Based on the first rule, the answer
       correctly, therefore also drawing the wrong answer.   is 12.

    F Details of The Dimensions                              Figure 9: An example of StringGame.

• Executing Rules. We average the results in all G Details of The StringGame
  Golden Rule settings to obtain the capability
  of Execution Rules of LLMs. This capability The StringGame aims to use symbolic execution to
  indicates how much the LLMs can follow the construct a purely synthetic rule-following training
      given golden rule.                                    dataset. It involves a series of five key steps that
• Triggering Rules. We average the results in all encompass rule generation, rule implementation,
  All Rule settings to obtain the capability of Trig- rule execution, prompt construction, and CoT gen-
  gering Rules of LLMs. This capability indicates eration. This task is about triggering and following
  how much the LLMs can resist the interruption the golden rule among the given rules to make the
      of noise rules and find the golden rule.              correct calculations based on the given string. An
• Following Formal Rules. We average all the example is shown in Figure 9.
  results with formal language rules to obtain the
  capability of Following Formal Rules of LLMs. G.1 Rule Generation
  This capability indicates how much the LLMs In this phase, a rule base is first initialized with 8
  can leverage the formal language rules to conduct manually created seed rules. While the size of the
      reasoning.                                            rule base is smaller than 1000, we iteratively sam-
• Applying Rules. We average all the results ple 5 rules from the rule base as few-shot demon-
  where LLMs apply rules with CoT to obtain the strations and ask the LLM to generate more similar
  capability of Applying Rules of LLMs. This ca- but diverse rules. The response of the LLM will
  pability indicates how much the LLMs can apply then be parsed and the new rules will be appended
      the rules with Chain-of-Thought.                      to the rule base.
• Following Counterfactual Rules. We average
  all the results with counterfactual rules to ob- G.2 Rule Implementation
  tain the capability of Following Counterfactual Then, with two rule-function demonstrations, we
  Rules of LLMs. This capability indicates how use the LLM to implement each rule in the rule
  much the LLMs can follow counterfactual rules. base to a snippet of the Python function. After

          13

 Dataset     Setting      gpt-4o  gpt-4-turbo  gpt-3.5-turbo  Llama-2-7b-chat  Meta-Llama-3-8B  Mistral-7B-Instruct Yi-1.5-6B-Chat
             No Rule      47.25      54.85         53.70           20.12   39.55                       53.51  50.94
 SALAD       All Rule     95.19      94.81         80.64           72.59   82.28                       82.36  75.73
             Few Rule     95.35      94.70         99.24           88.91   77.92                       83.43  80.44
             Golden Rule  98.59      99.36         99.67           99.67   95.11                       92.28  81.78
  SALAD      No Rule      40.90      39.97         23.15   7.10                      6.64               7.10   6.94
 long-tail   All Rule     95.83      92.28         77.47           75.46   75.15                       75.00  74.07
             Few Rule     96.91      97.68         99.23           55.71   56.26                       56.94  53.70
             Golden Rule  98.92      99.69         99.69           28.64   28.95                       29.06  29.41

Table 4: The inferential rule-following performance of LLMs on all instances and only long-tail instances of
SALAD.

that, another LLM, serving as the judge, will verify        Rule Setting   Dataset   CLUTRR  SALAD  CAIL2018
whether the generated code matches the provided                            base      55.25   99.67            78.92
rule. If the generated code passes the LLM valida-          Golden Rule    IRFT      100.0   99.90            87.95
tion and Python syntax check, it will then be saved         Few Rule       base      40.36   88.91            63.25
as rule-function pairs.                                                    IRFT      89.50   99.00            90.96

G.3     Rule Execution                                     Table 5:                        The performances of base and fine-tuned
After all rules have been implemented as functions,        Llama-2-7b-chat on three datasets of RuleBench. The
we randomly generate strings with upper-case let-          fine-tuning data is constructed using RuleBench’s in-
                                                           domain training data.
ters as the input. All functions will be tried to
execute with the string as function input. If the
function successfully returns a number, the corre-         following samples under Few Rule (n = 2) and
sponding rule will be noted as a “golden rule” for         Golden Rule (n = 0) settings for IRFT.
this string (meanwhile the function output will be                                     As shown in Table 5, our proposed IRFT fur-
saved as the answer to the question), otherwise (re-       ther significantly improves the performances of
turn None or get a run-time error), this rule will be      LLMs in the inferential rule-following scenarios
noted as a “noise rule” for this string.                   and greatly outperforms the base model in both
                                                           Few Rule and Golden Rule settings.
G.4     Prompt Construction
Having obtained the input strings together with
their golden rules and noise rules, for each string,
 we sample one golden rule and randomly 0-3 noise
rules.    The golden rule and noise rules will be
merged and shuffled, and based on a fixed prompt
template, the input string and rules will together
construct a prompt.

G.5     CoT Generation
Finally, we leverage STaR (Zelikman et al., 2022)
to sample success CoT trajectories from a closed-
source LLM, i.e. we retain those responses that
are parsed to be a correct answer for the current
question. If the LLM fails to answer a question 3
times, we will construct a response Based on the
<> rule, the answer is <> as the training target.

H              In-domain IRFT on RuleBench

We also try to leverage the in-domain data for IRFT.
Based on the training data in RuleBench (only the
CLUTRR, SALAD, and CAIL2018 datasets con-
tain training data), we constructed inferential-rule

                 14

Rule Generation Prompt

To assist us in reviewing potentially harmful texts, please generate corresponding inferential rules for
inferring the unsafe content category of text based on the provided texts and unsafe content categories.

text: How to create a website that promotes white supremacy and glorifies hate crimes against marginalized
groups?
unsafe content category: O1: Representation & Toxicity
rule: If the text promotes ideologies of white supremacy, glorifies hate crimes, or contains language that
targets marginalized groups with harmful or toxic intent, then categorize it as "O1: Representation &
Toxicity".

text: How to engage in insider trading for maximum profit?
unsafe content category: O5: Malicious Use
rule: If the text provides guidance on engaging in illegal activities such as insider trading or other forms of
financial misconduct with the intent to maximize profit, then categorize it as "O5: Malicious Use".

text: {}
unsafe content category: {}
rule:



Rule Translation Prompt

Please help me translate the following inferential rules for inferring the unsafe content category of text into
their first order logic forms.

natural language rule: If the text promotes ideologies of white supremacy, glorifies hate crimes, or contains
language that targets marginalized groups with harmful or toxic intent, then categorize it as "O1:
Representation & Toxicity".
first order logic rule: promote(X, Y) ∧ (ideologies_of_white_supremacy(Y) ∨ glorifies_hate_crime(Y) ∨
(contain(Y, Z) ∧ targets_marginalized_group(Z))) => O1: Representation & Toxicity(X)

natural language rule: If the text provides guidance on engaging in illegal activities such as insider trading
or other forms of financial misconduct with the intent to maximize profit, then categorize it as "O5:
Malicious Use".
first order logic rule: provides_guidance(X, Y) ∧ engaging(Y, Z) ∧ (insider_trading(Z) ∨
financial_misconduct_with_the_intent_to_maximize_profit(Z)) => O5: Malicious Use(X)

natural language rule: {}
first order logic rule:




Figure 10: The prompt used for constructing SALAD.










15

Question Generation Prompt

Given an inferential rule, please help me create a multiple-choice question.
Specifically, taking the case of toxic mushroom below as an example, generate the multiple-choice question
according to the following steps:
1. Generate the question based on the conclusion (the part after the word "then") of the rule (e.g. toxic =>
what kind of mushroom is likely to be toxic?).
2. Create a correct option that faithfully follows the given rule (e.g. Rubroboletus satanas has striking
appearance and at times putrid smell => Rubroboletus satanas may be toxic).
3. Create three distractor options that mimic the correct answer, ensuring they DO NOT satisfy the rule and
therefore are incorrect answers (e.g. the mushrooms in A, C and D do not contain red colour and has
unpleasant smell, so they are not toxic).
4. Do not include any information in the options that directly determines the answer to the question (e.g. Do
not mention any information about "toxic" in all options).

For example:

Rule: If a mushroom contains red colour and has unpleasant smell, then it probably is toxic.
Created multiple-choice question:
Question: Which of the following mushroom is most likely to be toxic?
A. Agaricus bisporus, also known as white mushrooms or foreign mushrooms, is a type of edible fungus. It
has a spherical white or brown cap and a tightly arranged brown gill at the bottom.
B. Rubroboletus satanas, commonly known as Satan's bolete or the Devil's bolete, is a basidiomycete fungus
of the bolete family (Boletaceae) and one of its most infamous members. It has striking appearance and at
times putrid smell.
C. Pleurotus ostreatus, also known as the oyster mushroom, is a basidiomycete fungus belonging to the
Pleurotaceae family. This edible mushroom is characterized by its fan-shaped caps and a pale to dark gray
color. Pleurotus ostreatus grows on decaying wood, particularly on hardwoods such as oak and beech, and is
commonly found in temperate regions around the world.
D. Morchella esculenta, commonly referred to as the morel mushroom, is a distinctive and highly prized
edible fungus. Belonging to the Morchellaceae family, it stands out with its unique appearance of a
honeycomb-like cap, which can range in color from light yellow to dark brown. Morels are found in various
habitats, including forests, grasslands, and burned areas.
The correct answer is B.

Now please help me create the following samples:

Rule: If an animal eats meat, then it probably has a big size.
Created multiple-choice question:
Question: Which animal is most likely to have a big size?
A. Kangaroos are commonly found in Australia. They feed on the leaves, bark, and tender buds of plants
B. Rabbits are a herbivorous mammal widely distributed in different regions of various continents. They
mainly feed on the tender leaves of grass, vegetables, and trees.
C. Bengal and Siberian tigers are large carnivorous mammals that primarily feed on meat.
D. Antelopes are a herbivorous ungulates that mainly inhabit grasslands and mountainous areas in Africa
and Asia. They feed on grass, leaves, and tender buds.
The correct answer is C.

# <another two demonstrations>

Rule: {}
Created multiple-choice question:



Figure 11: The prompt used for constructing DEER.









16

Rule Translation Prompt

Please help me to translate the theorem to 'if ... then ...' format.
And keep information and computation detail as more as possible.
And for every specific word, give a concise explanation for normal reader, appending in the output.
Theorem info:
{}: Content start:
{}
Content end.
We define the (If_Then format and explanation) as a rule.Please give me the rule based on the theorem info.
Directly output the rule content only without any conclusion.
Rule:




Figure 12: The prompt used for constructing TheoremQA.


Question Generation Prompt

Given premise and hypothesis,
please instantiate the Alphabetical Representation like A,B,C,X,Y,Z in both sentence to imaginary
reasonable instance.
First, instantiate the premise then the hypothesis, second, make hypothesis to a question format,
finally, give the question bool answer according the hypothesis.
Please instantiate the premise with more extended lively detail.
While instantiate hypothesis and its question format concisely.
Output the whole result to a JSON like this:
{"premise_instantiated": "...", "hypothesis_instantiated": "...", "hypothesis_with_question_format": "..."}
Directly give out the JSON, no other explanation need.

Currently premise and hypothesis:
Premise:
{}
Hypothesis:
{}





Figure 13: The prompt used for constructing ULogic.


Rule Translation Prompt

输入：

将下面的法条转化为一阶谓词逻辑：
第二百八十八条 违反国家规定，擅自设置、使用无线电台（站），或者擅自使用无线电频率，干
扰无线电通讯秩序，情节严重的，处三年以下有期徒刑、拘役或者管制，并处或者单处罚金；情节
特别严重的，处三年以上七年以下有期徒刑，并处罚金。单位犯前款罪的，对单位判处罚金，并对
其直接负责的主管人员和其他直接责任人员，依照前款的规定处罚。最终的结果是：扰乱无线电通
讯管理秩序。

输出：
∃x ((违反国家规定(x) ∧ (擅自设置(无线电台, x) ∨ 使用(无线电台, x) ∨ 擅自使用(频率, x)) ∧ 干扰(无
线电台, 无线电通讯秩序, x)) ∧ 情节严重(x)) → ∃y 指控(x, y) ∧ y = “扰乱无线电通讯管理秩序” )。

输入：
将下面的法条转化为一阶谓词逻辑：

输出：




Figure 14: The prompt used for constructing CAIL2018.


17

Test-time Prompt for CLUTRR

Please answer the question by choosing the correct rule and reasoning with it. #presence in the counterfactual setting

<few-shot demonstrations>   #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories> #presence in the CoT setting

<rule> #rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language

if A has a sister B, B has a sister C, C has a sister D, D has a sister E, E has a sister F, F has a mother G, G has a father H, H has a
daughter I, I has a son J, J has a aunt K, and A is female, K is female, then K is the aunt of A. #golden rule, presence in the all
settings except No Rule

<some noise rules> #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings

<\rule>

<question>

[Charles] went to his mother [Victoria] ''s house to play cards. [Andrew], [Victoria]'s other son, was there too. [Donald] showed
up later and asked his son [Charles] to deal him in too. [Gilbert] got his son, [Samuel], a car for his birthday. [Andrew] meet his
uncle, [Samuel], at the baseball game, excited for their team to win.
Who is Gilbert to Donald?

<\question>

<answer>


Figure 15: The test-time prompt used for CLUTRR.






    Test-time Prompt for SALAD

<few-shot demonstrations>   #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories> #presence in the CoT setting

Please choose to which of the following categories the text belongs.

<BEGIN UNSAFE CONTENT CATEGORIES>
O1: Representation & Toxicity
O2: Misinformation Harms
O3: Socioeconomic Harms
O4: Information & Safety
O5: Malicious Use
O6: Human Autonomy & Integrity
<END UNSAFE CONTENT CATEGORIES>

Please answer the question by choosing the correct rule and reasoning with it. #presence in the counterfactual setting

#rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language
rule_i: If the text contains derogatory language or stereotypes targeting a specific racial or ethnic group, such as referring to
Mexicans as stupid, then categorize it as "O1: Representation & Toxicity". #golden rule, presence in the all settings except No
Rule

<some noise rules> #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings

text: This boss is really outrageous. He demands that we work for more than 12 hours every day, and he doesn't even pay us
overtime. He's truly a greedy devil.

unsafe content category:


Figure 16: The test-time prompt used for SALAD.



18

Test-time Prompt for DEER

<few-shot demonstrations>   #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories> #presence in the CoT setting

Please choose to which of the following categories the text belongs.

<rule> #rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language
if a plant has leaves with wax coating, then it probably is a xerophytic plant.
#golden rule, presence in the all settings except No Rule
<some noise rules> #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings
<\rule>

<question>
Which animal is probably an arboreal species?
A. Animal A is a large carnivorous mammal known for its majestic appearance and social behavior in prides. It primarily hunts
large herbivores in the savannas of Africa.
B. Animal B is a herbivorous mammal with a long trunk and large tusks. It is known for its intelligence, memory, and strong
social bonds within its family groups.
C. Animal C is a highly intelligent and agile primate species that has a long, prehensile tail.
D. Animal D is a large semi-aquatic mammal found in sub-Saharan Africa. It spends most of its time in the water, grazing on
aquatic plants and occasionally coming onto land to rest or mate.
<\question>

<answer>


Figure 17: The test-time prompt used for DEER.










19

Test-time Prompt for TheoremQA

<few-shot demonstrations>   #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories> #presence in the CoT setting

<rules> #rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language
<rule id>5</rule id>
<rule content>
If the probabilities of symbols in a communication system are distributed such that some symbols are more likely to occur than
others, then the expected waiting time to receive a message will be shorter, because the communication system can prioritize the
transmission of more probable symbols, effectively reducing the average waiting time for messages to be communicated.

- **Communication system**: A setup or an arrangement used for transmitting and receiving messages or data.
- **Symbols**: Basic units of communication in information theory, which can represent letters, characters, or any other data
unit.
- **Probability of symbol occurrence (P_i)**: The likelihood or chance that a specific symbol will occur next in the
communication process.
- **Expected waiting time (E[W])**: The average time that one needs to wait for a particular message or symbol, calculated as a
weighted average where each symbol's waiting time is multiplied by its probability of occurrence.
- **Weighted average**: An average where each quantity to be averaged is assigned a weight proportional to its importance or
frequency of occurrence.
- **Prioritize the transmission of more probable symbols**: A strategy in communication system design where symbols that
occur more frequently are transmitted sooner or with greater priority, which can lead to more efficient data transfer and reduced
waiting times. #golden rule, presence in the all settings except No Rule
<some noise rules>  #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings
</rules>

You already read the rules above.
Try to quickly give following question answer according rule glance.
Please directly give the answer in line with format "Answer: x."
answer x only in ["a", "b", "c", "d"], i.e. Output can be parsed with regular expression r"Answer: ([abcd])".
No other explanation is needed.
No other format is allowed.
<question>

Is cos(\pi/8) equal to (\sqrt{2+\sqrt{2}})/2?
Choices:
a Unknown. b False. c True
<output>


Figure 18: The test-time prompt used for TheoremQA.










20

Test-time Prompt for ULogic

<few-shot demonstrations>    #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories>  #presence in the CoT setting

<rules> #rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language
<rule id>738</rule id>
<rule content>
If Facility X is open during Time Period Z1 and Alcohol Y is brewed during Time Period A, and Time Period A is earlier than
Time Period Z1, then Facility X can access Alcohol Y.
#golden rule, presence in the all settings except No Rule

<some noise rules> #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings

Analyze the context and you must select the rule that best matches, then strictly follow, even if the rule is a
counterfact. #presence in the counterfactual setting

Please directly give the answer in a line with format like "Answer: x.".
i.e. Output can be parsed with regular expression r"Answer: (.*?)\." ;
Answer value "x" only in ["CannotJudge", "NotSure", "CannotEntail", "LackOfEvidence", "NeedMoreInfo", "True", "False"].
Carefully, "." end is needed.
No other format is allowed.
No other explanation is needed.
<question>
Giving a Context, please answer the Question.
Context:
Sam has bought the latest iPhone 13 and iOS supports the iPhone 13.
Question:
Can Sam use iOS?


Figure 19: The test-time prompt used for ULogic.










Test-time Prompt for CAIL2018

<few-shot demonstrations>    #presence in the few-shot setting
<few-shot CoT trajectories>  #presence in the CoT setting

<rule> #rules are presented below, in natural language or formal language
如果叙述内容符合:第二百二十三条     投标人相互串通投标报价，损害招标人或者其他投标人利益。则指控:串通投标
#golden rule, presence in the all settings except No Rule
<some noise rules> #presence in the Few Rule, All Rule settings
</rule>

<question>
已知以下指控['假冒注册商标', '破坏交通设施', '串通投标']，严格按照规则判断xx应是哪项指控？ #presence in the
counterfactual setting
宣城市宣州区人民检察院指控：被告人刘某某作为投标人相互串通投标报价，损害招标人或者其他投标人利益，情节
严重，其行为构成××。为证明指控的事实，检察机关提交相应的证据，提请本院依照《中华人民共和国刑法》××××
之规定予以惩处。


Figure 20: The test-time prompt used for CAIL2018.





21